# Colibactin-induced-genotoxicity

# About
Various bacteria are suggested to contribute to colorectal cancer (CRC) development, including pks+ E. coli which produce the genotoxin colibactin that induces characteristic mutational signatures in host epithelial cells. It remains unclear how the highly unstable colibactin molecule is able to access host epithelial cells and its DNA to cause harm. Using the microbiota-dependent ZEB2-transgenic mouse model of invasive CRC, we found that pks+ E. coli drives CRC exacerbation and tissue invasion in a colibactin-dependent manner. Using isogenic mutant strains, we further demonstrate that CRC exacerbation critically depends on expression of the E. coli type-1 pilus adhesin FimH and the F9-pilus adhesin FmlH. Blocking bacterial adhesion using a pharmacological FimH inhibitor attenuates colibactin-mediated genotoxicity and CRC exacerbation. Together, we show that the oncogenic potential of pks+ E. coli critically depends on bacterial adhesion to host epithelial cells and is critically mediated by specific bacterial adhesins. Adhesin-mediated epithelial binding subsequently allows production of the genotoxin colibactin in close proximity to host epithelial cells, which promotes DNA damage and drives CRC development. These findings present promising therapeutic avenues for the development of anti-adhesive therapies aiming at mitigating colibactin-induced DNA damage and inhibiting the initiation and progression of CRC, particularly in individuals at risk for developing CRC.

